Update conventions (#43)
pygfx/pylinalg: CONVENTIONS.md

All functions need to be covered by unit tests.

# Coordinate frame conventions

As the purpose of pylinalg as a library primarily is to support linear algebra
operations in pygfx and applications based on pygfx, we adhere to a number of
standard coordinate frame conventions to align with expectations from pygfx.

> Generally there are four transform steps when going from an object's local space,

Author: Thanks, very nice. I will include it.

all the way to screen space:

* Local space to world space: world matrix
* World space to view space: view matrix

> * View space to NDC/clip space: projection matrix

Author: Well, this linalg library exists solely to support pygfx, it's not a general purpose linalg library. I do think it's relevant, we have a couple of functions in pylinalg that generate perspective and orthographic projection matrices, which map to NDC/clip space.

In pygfx, every world object has its own model matrix, which
encapsulates scale, rotation and translation components. World objects
are additionally organized hierarchically using parent/child relationships.
The world matrix is then recursively defined for every world object; it is the
result of multiplying an object's model matrix with its parent's world matrix.
For the root world object, the world matrix is equal to its model matrix. 

The view and projection matrices are owned by camera objects. The view
matrix can be acquired by inverting the camera's world matrix. The projection matrix
is configured independently on the camera and depends on its

> type (perspective, orthographic).

Author: Yes, dependent in the sense that if you put the camera in the scene, it will influence the view matrix, indeed. That's correct.

Pylinalg provides methods in its functional API to produce all of these matrices.
Since world matrices are of key interest to users and developers working with pygfx

> there need to be some conventions in place regarding its axes.

Author: Sure.

* The positive Z axis is the forward direction.
* The positive Y axis is the up direction.
* The positive X axis is the right direction.

This means that if, for example, you add a car object to a scene, by default
it is assumed that the car is facing towards positive Z. Due to the above axis
conventions, you can then use `matrix_make_look_at` to easily create a new rotation
matrix that makes the car look in another direction.

> 

Author: Works for me!

# Memory layout conventions

Row-major can mean two things:

* Memory layout; are rows or columns contiguous in memory
* Are vectors columns or rows

> Numpy is row-major in both cases, and so we adhere to the same
> convention here in pylinalg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pylinalg's kernels are written assuming a row-major (C-contigous) layout. If a
kernel supports batch processing of vetors, it assumes that the last dimension
contains the relevant vector data and that all other dimensions are batch
dimensions. As such, you can think of vectors being row vectors.
```

Actually, numpy doesn't have a notion of a vector being a row or column vector. 

The community just happens to stack data along the first axis by convention, which has its roots in good old SQL, where each row represents a data tuple. scikit-learn stuck to that convention, and now it's everywhere. Numpy terminology talks about `core` and `loop` dimensions for batched processing, but I don't think we need to introduce this notion.

All functions need to be covered by unit tests.

# Coordinate frame conventions

As the purpose of pylinalg as a library primarily is to support linear algebra
operations in pygfx and applications based on pygfx, we adhere to a number of
standard coordinate frame conventions to align with expectations from pygfx.

Generally there are four transform steps when going from an object's local space,
all the way to screen space:

* Local space to world space: world matrix
* World space to view space: view matrix
* View space to NDC/clip space: projection matrix

> * NDC/clip space to screen space: screen matrix

Reviewer 2: I think we can leave this out, since it's baked into the gpu?

Author: OK!

In pygfx, every world object has its own model matrix, which
encapsulates scale, rotation and translation components. World objects
are additionally organized hierarchically using parent/child relationships.
The world matrix is then recursively defined for every world object; it is the
result of multiplying an object's model matrix with its parent's world matrix.

> For the root world object, the world matrix is equal to its model matrix. 

Reviewer 2: I think this is incorrect. The model matrix defines the transform w.r.t. the parent, but for the root object (the scene) there is no root. In Pygfx this works out correctly - if the camera is placed in the scene - because the camera's world matrix (i.e. the inverse of the view matrix) contains the root model matrix.

Author: As far as I know, we use the inverse of the camera's world matrix as the view matrix.

It's not used as the root model matrix otherwise. We have plenty of examples where the camera is not a part of the scene, and where it is part of the scene, and it's not used as the root model matrix in any instance.

Reviewer 2: Let me try to clarify. Imagine this scene:
```
scene  --> wobjec1 --> wobject2
(root)  \--> camera1

camera2
```

Semantically, `scene.matrix` should not be part of `wobject1.world_transform` or `wobject2.world_transform`, because the matrix defines the transform w.r.t. the parent, and since the scene is the root, it's own matrix should not be taken into account. In pygfx we wrongfully do take it into account. We should fix that.

Now when this scene is rendered with camera1, we actually get correct results, because `scene.matrix` is also included in the camera's world transform, which is inverted to get the view transform.

If the scene is rendered with camera2, and `scene.matrix` is not identity, we get wrong results.

Reviewer 2: As for this text, I think "For the root world object, the world matrix is equal to its model matrix." should either be left out or something like "For the root world object, the world matrix is the identity transform, by definition."

Author: > Semantically, `scene.matrix` should not be part of `wobject1.world_transform` or `wobject2.world_transform`, because the matrix defines the transform w.r.t. the parent, and since the scene is the root, it's own matrix should not be taken into account. In pygfx we wrongfully do take it into account. We should fix that.

I respectfully disagree. Counter example:

```
         /--> tire
car     /
(root)  \--> camera1

camera2
```

The car has its own transform, in order to move around world space. That world space is an empty nothingness in this example is besides the point.

> If the scene is rendered with camera2, and `scene.matrix` is not identity, we get wrong results.

Do we? I don't think so?

Reviewer 2: >>  If the scene is rendered with camera2, and scene.matrix is not identity, we get wrong results.
>
> Do we? I don't think so?

That depends on what you expect to happen 😆

Reviewer 2: After a discussion, we can conclude that we can choose whatever we want. As it is written now, the reference frame is the "nothingness behind the root".

Reviewer 2: You seem to have commented earlier, but I had not seen your comment when I posted the above.

The disagreement here seems to be in the definition of the *root node* vs the *world space*. You say that they are the same. But it's equally valid to say that the world is the thing beyond the root node. It's a choice we have to make.

Personally, I initially felt that the former made more sense, but now I lean towards the latter. In part because in the case of  *root=world* we'd somehow need to enforce that the root node's transform is not used.

* Local space to world space: world matrix
* World space to view space: view matrix
* View space to NDC/clip space: projection matrix

In pygfx, every world object has its own model matrix, which
encapsulates scale, rotation and translation components. World objects
are additionally organized hierarchically using parent/child relationships.
The world matrix is then defined for every world object as follows:
* If the object has no parent, the world matrix is equal to the model matrix.
* Otherwise, the world matrix is equal to the multiplication of the model matrix
  with that of its parent.

The view and projection matrices are owned by camera objects. The view
matrix can be acquired by inverting the camera's world matrix. The projection matrix
is configured independently on the camera and depends on its
type (perspective, orthographic).

Pylinalg provides methods in its functional API to produce all of these matrices.
Since world matrices are of key interest to users and developers working with pygfx
there need to be some conventions in place regarding its axes.

* The positive Z axis is the forward direction.
* The positive Y axis is the up direction.

> * The positive X axis is the right direction.

Reviewer 2: Don't we need to decide on https://github.com/pygfx/pygfx/issues/460?

    vertices are expressed. For example, when inspecting the position of a
    cube's corners, then the numerical values of the corners are given in the
    cube's *local frame*.
3. **parent**: The parent frame is the coordinate frame in which an object's
   pose (position + orientation) are expressed. *Parent* can either be the
   inertial reference frame (world) or it can be another object's local frame.
   An object's position is always relative to its parent; for example, if a
   lightbulb has a lamp's local frame as it's parent, then the lightbulb's
   position expressed in world coordinates will change whenever the position of
   lamp changes, i.e., if the lamp moves, so does the lightbulb.

Further, when talking about transformation matrices and coordinate transforms,
we use two additional frames to avoid confusion:

* **source**: The source frame is the coordinate frame in which
to-be-transformed vectors are expressed, i.e., it is the reference frame of the
input vectors.
* **target**: The target frame is the coordinate frame in which transformed
  vectors are expressed, i.e., it is the reference frame of the output vectors.

> Generally there are four transform steps when going from an object's local space,
> all the way to screen space:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally there are three transform steps when going from an object's local space,
all the way to NDC:
```

> Generally there are four transform steps when going from an object's local space,
> all the way to screen space:
> 
> * Local space to world space: world matrix
> * World space to view space: view matrix
> * View space to NDC/clip space: projection matrix
> 
> The view and projection matrices are owned by camera objects. The view
> matrix can be acquired by inverting the camera's world matrix. The projection matrix
> is configured independently on the camera and depends on its
> type (perspective, orthographic).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To render an object we have to express it's vertices in a camera's so-called NDC
coordinates, which stands for normalized device coordinates. Recall that
vertices are expressed in the object's *local* frame, which means we need to
work out the transformation from object *local* to NDC. We can do this by
following the chain of transformations in the scene graph from object *local*
via *world* to camera *local* and from camera *local* into NDC. Since this chain
is very important for rendering, it's parts have special names:

* **World Matrix**: The transformation from object's *local* into *world*.
* **View Matrix**: The transformation from *world* to camera's *local*. This is
  the inverse of the camera's world matrix.
* **Projection Matrix**: The transformation from camera's *local* into NDC.
```

We can introduce this by connecting to the frame conventions we used above. Also, having written this, would it flow better if this gets mentioned after the axis naming convention?

   An object's position is always relative to its parent; for example, if a
   lightbulb has a lamp's local frame as it's parent, then the lightbulb's
   position expressed in world coordinates will change whenever the position of
   lamp changes, i.e., if the lamp moves, so does the lightbulb.

Further, when talking about transformation matrices and coordinate transforms,
we use two additional frames to avoid confusion:

* **source**: The source frame is the coordinate frame in which
  to-be-transformed vectors are expressed, i.e., it is the reference frame of the
  input vectors.
* **target**: The target frame is the coordinate frame in which transformed
  vectors are expressed, i.e., it is the reference frame of the output vectors.

In addition to the above-mentioned reference frames, pylinalg uses a
standardized naming scheme for the axes of a reference frame. The convention
matches the convention chosen in pygfx:

* The positive X axis indicates the right direction.
* The positive Y axis indicates the up direction.
* The Z axis is interpreted differently depending on the type of object:
  * For cameras and lights, the _negative_ Z axis is the forward/viewing direction.

>   * For all other objects, the positive Z axis is the forward/viewing direction.

Reviewer 2: Normal objects don't see.
```suggestion
  * For all other objects, the positive Z axis is the forward direction.
```

All functions need to be covered by unit tests.

# Coordinate frame conventions

The primary purpose of pylinalg as a library is to support linear algebra
operations in pygfx and applications based on pygfx. As such, pylinalg shares
its coordinate frame conventions with pygfx, which in turn follows [gITF's
conventions
](https://registry.khronos.org/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#coordinate-system-and-units).

## Coordinate Systems

Unless stated otherwise, frames use 3-dimensional euclidean coordinates and a
right-handed coordinate frame. What differs depending on the type are the
semantics used to describe each axis. Distances are measured in `m` (meters) and
and angles in `rad` (radians) unless stated otherwise.

* **Object Coordinates** are represented using `(x, y, z)` vectors and are used
  to describe objects in a scene. They use the following semantics:
  * The *negative* X axis is called *right*.
  * The positive Y axis is called *up*.
  * The positive Z axis is called *forward*.

> * **Camera Coordinates** are represented using `(x, y, z)` vectors and are used

Author: This also applies to Lights in glTF. See here: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF/tree/main/extensions/2.0/Khronos/KHR_lights_punctual#adding-light-instances-to-nodes

Reviewer: Hm, I just thought that lights point along (0, 0, -Z) but are otherwise the same as normal objects. I.e., if I move a light "forward" by 2 units, will it travel along positive or negative Z?

Author: I think that's what is meant by

> the light's direction is defined as the 3-vector `(0.0, 0.0, -1.0)`

Reviewer 2: > It's probably because shadow casting requires rendering the scene from the light's point of view, as if it were a camera.

Aha! 💡 

I think both camera and light shine/look forward, which is their `(0, 0, -1)` axis.

Reviewer: Then I will update to include lights as using camera coordinates.

  to describe cameras. They use the following semantics:
  * The positive X axis is called *right*.
  * The positive Y axis is called *up*.
  * The *negative* Z axis is called *forward*.
* **Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC)** are represented using `(x, y, z)`
  vectors and are used to describe points to render/plot. Points inside the unit
  (half) box are rendered, others are not. NDC uses the following semantics:
  * The positive X axis is called *right* and the box extent is `[-1, 1]`.
  * The positive Y axis is called *up* and the box extent is `[-1, 1]`.

>   * The *negative* Z axis is the viewing direction and the box extent is `[0, 1]`.

Reviewer 2: In NDC we look down the positive z-axis again, right?  An object at z=0.1 occludes an object at z=0.2.

Reviewer: In that case NDC would be left-handed ... unless the negative x-axis is right?

Author: That's right, NDC is left handed.

Reviewer: Updated.

  * The positive X axis is called *right*.
  * The positive Y axis is called *up*.
  * The *negative* Z axis is called *forward*.
* **Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC)** are left-handed and represented using
  `(x, y, z)` vectors. They are used to describe points to render/plot. Points
  inside the unit (half) box are rendered, others are not. NDC uses the
  following semantics:
  * The positive X axis is called *right* and the box extent is `[-1, 1]`.
  * The positive Y axis is called *up* and the box extent is `[-1, 1]`.
  * The positive Z axis is the viewing direction and the box extent is `[0, 1]`.
* **Spherical Coordinates** are represented using `(radius, theta, phi)` vectors
  and use the following semantics:
  * The *radius* measures the distance between a point and the origin and lies
    between `[0, inf)`.
  * The *phi* angle measures the counter-clockwise (CCW) rotation around the
    positive y-axis. It is measured from the positive Z-axis and lies between
    `[0, pi)`.
  * The *theta* angle measures the counter-clockwise (CCW) rotation around the
    negative X-axis. It is measured from the positive Y-axis and lies between

>     `[0, 2*pi)`.

Reviewer: I've updated the spherical coordinates to reflect the definition that the current implementation uses.

This API should make any linalg work much easier and safer, partly
because semantics matters here: a point is not the same as a vector.

These objects are backed by an array-like structure and are thus easy to
convert to native Python/Numpy objects. The objects support native python
operators such as `__mul__` where applicable, and have methods
specific to the type of object.

Extensive input validation and ease of use is prioritized over performance.

The source for this API resides in the `pylinalg.obj` subpackage and is organized
by type.

## Imports cycles

Since the classes here will regularly need to instantiate other types,
circular import dependencies exist. To work around this, only the `LinalgBase`
type can be imported at module level, and other types will have to be imported
at runtime in methods.

## Function naming

* Names should be concise and short.
* For every method, there is an alternative in-place method, signified
  with the prefix `i`. This is not the prettiest option, but it is
  concise and short.

## Copying and mutability

* By default, methods return new objects, and do not mutate self. Such
  methods shall be referred to as "copying methods".

> * In-place methods return `self` to enable function chaining.

Author: This section was on the object api that is removed in this PR.

> * In-place methods return `self` to enable function chaining.

Reviewer: Oh, ofc. GH clipped the file just after `# Functional API conventions` and I didn't realize it. ignore this comment :D
